# Week 5 Journal

## Readings
As there was the option to either explore some of the best DH Data Visualization projects or to view Cristina Wood's sonification of the Ottawa River I reviewed Cristina's Master's Research Project. I chose to review this because Cristina was my TA for my 3rd year Historical Theory class. She made the course content understandable and really worked to overcome some of the complaints that other students had with the class at the time. Because of this, I knew about this project and have the newspaper clipping you had included for us to read.(my mom saved it because it had something to do with Carleton and History and she didn't know that it was my TA).

While I perused her project last year, I did not interact with it on a deep level. Now, after doing further thinking about sonification and how data is displayed I am blown away by the detail and nuance presented. I am not typically a fan of the visual/audio medium(I only listen to a few select podcasts, text > video/audio stories, etc.) having the data for the river presented musically makes a lot of sense. As the Joanna Dean mentioned in the news article, we are able to recognize patterns and shifts in music that we can miss with spreadsheets or traditional graphs. Additionally, having the data available sonically makes it more accessible to visually-impaired people. There is no need to worry about colourblindness, or whether the bars should be spaced more etc. Although I guess the flip-side of this is that for those that are hearing-impaired this project would not be understandable. But the songs are also accompanied by an Essay that describes the process and the songs so that may be of some use.

I found that Cristina was able to summarize and sonify the data into distinct notes and tones so that the variances would be identifiable to people really well. Listening to the various songs made me want to explore the essay so that I could better contextualize and understand them. It made me realize how much potential there is in this field, especially compared to my brief foray into sonification with TwoTone. I did not know that Carleton awarded Cristina a medal for the best research by any masters student last year, but it was well deserved.


## Sonification
I went into this aspect not looking forward to it since I am not a huge fan of the audio/visual medium usually, however TwoTone and my exploration of the Ottawa River Sonification showed me how much use there is in sonifying data. Since the instructions said I could record a podcast with audacity OR sonify some data I chose to sonify the data since I have put myself on tight timelines. I did however explore some of the instructions on how to use Audacity since that is an interesting and powerful tool and I wanted to learn a bit more about it for future use.

I did not exlpore many of the options in TwoTone, however I played around with the BPM and some of the insturments and speed. I used the provided data since it was the easiest and simplest. The two options provided had one with relatively low counts and one with higher counts. After listening to each track, I noticed that TwoTone usually uses a higher pitch/tone for the higher a number is, so for the Count of Other Materials I used a Glockenspiel since I found the sound, with a higher bpm matched well. For the Count of Coins I used the double bass since the data counts were lower so the tone was lower which the double bass played well with. I upped both to 173 bpm so that it flowed better. With the double bass I played around with the tempo but since it was a  double bass i found that higher tempos would reverberate more almost meaning it was harder to tell the sounds apart at the bpm that i had chosen. All of these considerations for just a really simple dataset was interesting, as doing this for larger datasets would present a whole host of different challenges and considerations in how to frame the data.

I think how I chose to represent the data sonically here made sense with the data that I had, however it would be interesting to see what it would be like with larger datasets with more variance in the data.


## Mapping
The StoryMapping Tool seems like a really good basic tool for students to use to create geospatial narratives. It is a relatively simple tool but sometimes that is good since that is all that is required. A picture, a location, and a description can be utilized together to tell a good story. When I explored it, I wanted to visualize all of the places that I've worked to see how close and far they are to eachother. There is a clear trend with my first jobs being close to where I live and then later jobs during university being more spread out.


I have some knowledge dating back to highschool with html, css, and javascript as in grade 12 we were tasked with trying to create various replacement sites for our highschool. The project I worked on did not get selected to be used, however it was a good experience to learn how to build a website.

I have enjoyed exploring some GIS work during my Historians Craft course in second year, so creating a webmap seemed interesting and up my alley.


I really enjoyed diving back into html and css and javascript since it felt like learning to ride a bike again remembering how to declare a variable, how to import a javascript file, etc. I faced minor difficulty with the Map Warper as it didn't play nice with the first maps I wanted to choose but I went a different way that worked out in the end. As part of one of my Digital Humanities classes in my second year we explored a site with many historical maps and looked at how they overlayed as well, so this was really cool to see one way that it can be done. I was able to get everything working without a hitch as I followed the instructions and used my existing knowledge to ensure I didn't screw anything up.

Someday in the future if I have the time I want to play around with more maps and rectify them and work on overlaying maps for the larger area of ottawa to see how things have expanded. I will definitely be using a lot of the code used here for that.


## Posters
In some of my free time, or time that should be spent doing otherstuff, I play around with some graphics as well, usually in G.I.M.P. so taking some of that and applying it in a scholarly context seemed interesting. The discussion around comic sans reminds me of my highschool computer science teacher who would admonish Comic Sans all the time, however as noted it does have its uses for those with reading disablities. That is why he was an ardent supported of [Comic Neue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comic_Neue), a more refined and modern version of Comic Sans. I found this new version works a lot better than Comic Sans ever did, but that may be because I got used to seeing it.

I had never used Inkscape before, but had heard of its uses for svg from other more talented artists. There is something about the layout of the toolboxes and tools that doesn't quite mesh with me however I still found it relatively easy to use accompanied by some of the instructions provided. I knew alot about the colour blind considerations for graphs before since some of the hockey analytic experts I follow on Twitter (such as [@IneffectiveMath](https://twitter.com/IneffectiveMath), [@ChartingHockey](https://twitter.com/ChartingHockey), [@asmae_toumi](https://twitter.com/asmae_toumi) have discussed finding better alternative palettes for their work. It was interesting and useful to see how inkscape, coupled with other sites work together to allow for better interactivity with graphs and posters. These people have also opened my eyes to better academic poster design. For example the posters made [here](https://twitter.com/asmae_toumi/status/1177966227253321728/photo/1) and [here](https://twitter.com/asmae_toumi/status/911699314451329025), especially that second one showed me that academic posters can be so much more than bristol board sectioned into 3 areas. I found the poster templates provided in the instructions to work really well for what they were used for, providing proofs, or to sell someone on a brainstormed idea. 

However, the route I took with it I used the text of my essay in the outside areas, then in the circular motion middle portion I used pictures to show the progress of the Roman military. If this was a professional poster I would need to include references and cite each image used, but this was a redo of an exam essay I had written last year so I did not have any of that information on hand.

I think the poster worked well enough. If I was serious about it I would have created my own vector graphics to use instead of relying on the internet, and I would have balanced the images so that they fit and flowed well. As it stands the images are kind of slapped together and work to show the progress, but they could flow better together to demonstrate my points.

On a side note, I just realized that I had forgot to delete some of the text from the template design for my poster so it sticks out like a sore thumb as it is completely different than the rest of my poster. If this were a serious project then I would hopefully have reviewed it and caught it ahead of time. I plan on keeping it as is for now to remind me that I need to take my time with my work and to not rush things.

I really enjoyed the act of transferring my essay into a more visual format and I think this exericise should be done more often as it engages different parts of your brain as you think about the subject matter for what does and doesn't work in making your arguments.

I think the humanities would do well to start thinking about using more of these posters to showcase their work as it may attract more people and different people to the work than those who traditionally read papers or articles.

## Weekly Reflection
I greatly enjoyed this week's work, and probably would have enjoyed it if I left myself more time to do everything. The material was engaging and interesting and relevant to a lot of potential future work for Digital History and university work in general. This week's material really made me think about how there are different ways to express my scholarly work instead of the traditional essay. I've really found sonification to be interesting with regards to using it for large datasets, something I had never considered before. Similarly, creating an academic poster of an essay made me think about how I wanted to present the information differently, how to boil my points down and have them work along with other factors in a visual medium. It made me appreciate courses that allow for the coursework to be creative projects or other methods. One of my digital humanities' courses in second year had a final project where we had to explore a DH project and do a presentation on it, or to create our own. I chose to do a project on Omeka as it seemed more simple and traditional to me, but now I am starting to realize how doing a creative project may have been a more fulfilling experience. This week's material has made me think about how I can be a better historian/scholar/student by considering alternative methods of visualization, or expanding upon my written work with good visuals.
